1. Purpose: This code book describes the variables in the tidy data set act-recog-tidy.txt, as well as the rationale and process for generating and presenting those variables. This work is Programming Assignment 1 of the Coursera course getdata-014, "Getting & Cleaning Data".

2. Code Book (Variables):
This section describes the variables contained in the tidy data set, and the variables that were in the original raw data set. 

     a. The tidy variables are: 
          1) "subject" - Each of the 30 experiment subjects, identified by their number
          2) "activity" - Each activity the subject was performing during the experiment. Values are "lying", "sitting", "standing", "walking", "walkingdownstairs", "walkingupstairs"
          3) Multiple experimental measurement mean and standard deviation variables (features) - this is a subset of the 561 features in the raw data and the variable names have been cleaned from the raw data variable names: 
            "tbodyaccmeanx" "tbodyaccmeany" "tbodyaccmeanz" "tbodyaccstdx" "tbodyaccstdy" "tbodyaccstdz" "tgravityaccmeanx" "tgravityaccmeany" "tgravityaccmeanz" "tgravityaccstdx" "tgravityaccstdy" "tgravityaccstdz" "tbodyaccjerkmeanx" "tbodyaccjerkmeany" "tbodyaccjerkmeanz" "tbodyaccjerkstdx" "tbodyaccjerkstdy" "tbodyaccjerkstdz" "tbodygyromeanx" "tbodygyromeany" "tbodygyromeanz" "tbodygyrostdx" "tbodygyrostdy" "tbodygyrostdz" "tbodygyrojerkmeanx" "tbodygyrojerkmeany" "tbodygyrojerkmeanz" "tbodygyrojerkstdx" "tbodygyrojerkstdy" "tbodygyrojerkstdz" "tbodyaccmagmean" "tbodyaccmagstd" "tgravityaccmagmean" "tgravityaccmagstd" "tbodyaccjerkmagmean" "tbodyaccjerkmagstd" "tbodygyromagmean" "tbodygyromagstd" "tbodygyrojerkmagmean" "tbodygyrojerkmagstd" "fbodyaccmeanx" "fbodyaccmeany" "fbodyaccmeanz" "fbodyaccstdx" "fbodyaccstdy" "fbodyaccstdz" "fbodyaccmeanfreqx" "fbodyaccmeanfreqy" "fbodyaccmeanfreqz" "fbodyaccjerkmeanx" "fbodyaccjerkmeany" "fbodyaccjerkmeanz" "fbodyaccjerkstdx" "fbodyaccjerkstdy" "fbodyaccjerkstdz" "fbodyaccjerkmeanfreqx" "fbodyaccjerkmeanfreqy" "fbodyaccjerkmeanfreqz" "fbodygyromeanx" "fbodygyromeany" "fbodygyromeanz" "fbodygyrostdx" "fbodygyrostdy" "fbodygyrostdz" "fbodygyromeanfreqx" "fbodygyromeanfreqy" "fbodygyromeanfreqz" "fbodyaccmagmean" "fbodyaccmagstd" "fbodyaccmagmeanfreq" "fbodybodyaccjerkmagmean" "fbodybodyaccjerkmagstd" "fbodybodyaccjerkmagmeanfreq" "fbodybodygyromagmean" "fbodybodygyromagstd" "fbodybodygyromagmeanfreq" "fbodybodygyrojerkmagmean" "fbodybodygyrojerkmagstd" "fbodybodygyrojerkmagmeanfreq"

     b. The raw dataset contained two data subsets, "train" and "test". Each record in the raw dataset provided: 
          1) An identifier of the subject who carried out the experiment.
          2) Its activity label.                     
          3) A 561-feature vector with time and frequency domain variables.      
          4) Triaxial acceleration from the accelerometer (total acceleration) and the estimated body acceleration. The Fourier signals were for 128 samples at 50 Hz.
          5) Triaxial angular velocity from the gyroscope. 


3. Data Cleanup (see script "run_analysis.R"):
This section describes the choices made in order to tidy the data set from the raw data. The data itself is normalized to the range -1 <> 1.

    1) DATA TRANSFORMATION 1 - Merges train & test data sets. Also removes feature number (1-561) while reading data from files into data tables. Made the decision to order the training data first since it is the larger of the two data sets (train-70% & test-30%)

    2) DATA TRANSFORMATION 2 - Retains only means & standard deviation columns, i.e. removes variables that are not of interest. 

    3) DATA TRANSFORMATION 3 - Applies descriptive activity labels to the activities in the data set. Note: a grammatical error in the raw data set was corrected ("LAYING" to "lying").
       "1" -> "walking"
       "2" -> "walkingupstairs"
       "3" -> "walkingdownstairs"
       "4" -> "sitting"
       "5" -> "standing"
       "6" -> "lying"

    4) DATA TRANSFORMATION 4 - Creates more analyzable variable names & labels by making them lower case and removing punctuation marks "-" and "()".

    5) DATA TRANSFORMATION 5 - Groups the data by subject and then by activity and presents the mean of each feature measurement within those groupings.

4. Study Design: 
This section describes the study design that motivated collection and cleaning of this data set. In this case, the use of the particular raw data set was pre-determined as part of a course assignment. The raw data source is as follows:

     The raw data used for this study was generated by Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz(1,2), Davide Anguita(1), Alessandro Ghio(1), Luca Oneto(1) and Xavier Parra(2) in work for:
          1 - Smartlab - Non-Linear Complex Systems Laboratory, DITEN - Università degli Studi di Genova, Genoa (I-16145), Italy, and 
          2 - CETpD - Technical Research Centre for Dependency Care and Autonomous Living Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (BarcelonaTech). Vilanova i la Geltrú (08800), Spain

     The raw data was generated for an experimental study entitled, "Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Data Set". The study built a Human Activity Recognition database from the recordings of 30 subjects, aged 19-48 years, performing six activities of daily living (ADL) while carrying a waist-mounted Samsung Galaxy SII smartphone with embedded inertial sensors. 

     The six activities performed were WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING (sic). During each activity, the experiment captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz from the smartphone. The obtained dataset of 10299 observations was randomly partitioned into two data subsets, "training" (observations from 70% of participants) and "test" (observations from 30% of participants). 

     The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) were pre-processed by applying noise filters and then sampled in fixed-width sliding windows of 2.56 sec and 50% overlap (128 readings/window). The sensor acceleration signal, which has gravitational and body motion components, was separated using a Butterworth low-pass filter into body acceleration and gravity. The gravitational force was assumed to have only low frequency components, therefore a filter with 0.3 Hz cutoff frequency was used. From each window, a vector of features containing 561 attributes was obtained by calculating variables from the time and frequency domains.

     The study principals donated this data in 2012 and it has been made available at: http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones which was the source of the raw data for this analysis, as well as some of the content in this code book. 


